Ordered complexity therefore emerges through a self-stabilizig cascade of symmetry-breaking bifurcations that have an intrinsically hierarchical property, finer spatial detail emerging within already established structure, as whorls arise from tips and fine branchings occur in growing laterals. These hierarchical cascades of bifurcations are a characteristic feature of morphogenesis in all species, as we shall see in the next chapter. 
From this perspective, the Dasycladales constitute a natural group not because of their history but because of the way their basic structure is generated. The historical sequence in which different species have evolved is of considerable interest, for it may tell us something about their neighborhood relations in the space of parameters (genes) that define the domains leading to different forms. But we can make sense of this history only within the context of a morphogenetic theory describing how the different forms are generated. This is a theory of what Stephen Jay Gould has called morphospace, the space of possible morphologies for species organized according to certain principles. Our theory suggests that whorls of laterals arising from an unbranched stalk are typical of the order, because this is an intrinsically robust, generic form that the morphogenetic field of this type of organism generates.
Genes do not
control; they cooperate in producing variations on generic themes.
Worth mentioning that this happens in a chemical context, which is itself regulated by genes - so there are a subset of genes which influence which of a limited set of stable attractors are reached, but set of possibilities are themselves determined , and thus far it is not clear that there are any known limits on the possibilitie s that these fields can offer. What perhaps is or could be shown is that most of the variation happens at this second level rather than at the primary level at which the nature of the morphological field. (It also remains to be shown how representative this of the huge field of morphology.)

Reminds me of an old and visceral realization that came from studying biology and gametogenesis in particular: that there's never a moment in development when everything is in some kind of state of rational control where the genetic plans are carefully consulted and the organism puls itslef out of nothingness by its genetic bootstraps. Instead there's only ever a series of cascading catalysations, stretching all the way back to the first replicator. Of course it could never really be otherwise but it was a rather unnerving feeling to understand it viscerally. The image that sticks in the mind is of a boulder bouncing down the side of a cliff, forever.

Tetrapod limbs are defined as the set of possible forms generated by the rules of focal condensation, branching bifurcation, and seg- mentation in the morphogenetic field of the limb bud. All forms are equivalent under transformations that use only these generative pro- cesses. With this we arrive at a logical definition of tetrapod limbs that is independent of history. The idea of a common ancestral form as a special structure occupying a unique branch point on the tree of life ceases to have taxonomic significance. Now tetrapod limbs could have arisen many times independently in different lineages of fish, and they still would be equivalent as long as they were made in the same way, whereas in a Darwinian (historical) taxonomy independent origins mean basic difference. To see how this may have happened, we need to examine how fish fins and tetrapod limbs are related to one another. 
Suggests a greater likelihood of similar evolutionary paths being followed on other worlds, especially if similar chemistries are involved but I think is suggest of more similar development even in more radically different scenarios.

Emphasis is on *robust* procedures, ones that can be repeated over and over with the same result, and how this limits the forms created, such as the animal bones only splitting once (though how does this match the fish shapes?)

What represents a test for such a perspective? Perhaps one might imagine repeated tests of bacteria exposed to various antibacterial agents and track how long on average it takes for immunity to develop - with the idea being that a random walk in the space of overall forms would have a smaller spread of times than a random walk in a more stylized morphogenetic field where some forms are far more easily accessfible than others. Th
I feel here that I don't really have the context to judge the extent of factual disagreements here, or whether its entirely a matter of new (at the time) developments and issues around framing.


Neo-Darwinism focuses on selec- tion as the primary source of biological order, as we have seen, or- ganisms being essentially survival machines. Kauffman questions this, asking whether there is not a rich source of emergent order that is available for free in complex systems of the type encountered in bi- ology, wherein many units interact in simple ways. 
