>The recess of the English Parliament lasted six weeks. The day on which the Houses met again is one of the most remarkable epochs in our history. From that day dates the corporate existence of the two great parties which have ever since alternately governed the country. In one sense, indeed, the distinction which then became obvious had always existed, and always must exist. For it has its origin in diversities of temper, of understanding, and of interest, which are found in all societies, and which will be found till the human mind ceases to be drawn in opposite directions by the charm of habit and by the charm of novelty. Not only in politics but in literature, in art, in science, in surgery and mechanics, in navigation and agriculture, nay, even in mathematics, we find this distinction. Everywhere there is a class of men who cling with fondness to whatever is ancient, and who, even when convinced by overpowering reasons that innovation would be beneficial, consent to it with many misgivings and forebodings. We find also everywhere another class of men, sanguine in hope, bold in speculation, always pressing forward, quick to discern the imperfections of whatever exists, disposed to think lightly of the risks and inconveniences which attend improvements and disposed to give every change credit for being an improvement. In the sentiments of both classes there is something to approve. But of both the best specimens will be found not far from the common frontier. The extreme section of one class consists of bigoted dotards: the extreme section of the other consists of shallow and reckless empirics.

Interesting that the distinction between order and freedom is made here and yet the description of the coalitions that is laid out in the next paragraphs shows a very different picture, where, for example, the artists are strongly royalist because of the prescriptive nature of the Puritans.

Overall thesis of the early part of the book is to show that the character of medieval governance was of a limited monarchy, which then transitioned to a limited monarchy more suited to the modern era, with Charles I and Cromwell being aberrations in their free exercise of power. The central element of the politics were the development of standing armies due to the religious wars in Europe which were necessities but gave kings protection from the threat of mass insurrection which was previously the ultimate check on monarchical power. This was necessary later in Britain than elsewhere and was only truly formed by Cromwell with the development of the new model army.

One dominant theme was the extreme competance of Cromwell, and the NMA. Elizabeth I was highly respected, but no monarch had the administrative power of Cromwell, efficiency and zeal coming together. It's presented in a way similar to modern narratives around tech giants outcompeting bureaucracies - a step-change in the quality of execution. The similarities between Cromwell and Napoleon were strong. Perhaps one factor is that skill in governance is a hard thing to identify and one where there is often not much incentive to promote those who display it. War, especially one in which the existing armies are very sub-optimal, provides both the feedback loop and incentive for rapid promotion which tends to generate high quality commanders.

> It was by degrees discovered that the King, in his individual capacity, had very little to give; that coronets and garters, bishoprics and embassies, lordships of the Treasury and tellerships of the Exchequer, nay, even charges in the royal stud and bedchamber, were really bestowed, not by him, but by his advisers. Every ambitious and covetous man perceived that he would consult his own interest far better by acquiring the dominion of a Cornish borough, and by rendering good service to the ministry during a critical session, than by becoming the companion, or even the minion, of his prince. It was therefore in the antechambers, not of George the First and of George the Second, but of Walpole and of Pelham, that the daily crowd of courtiers was to be found. It is also to be remarked that the same Revolution, which made it impossible that our Kings should use the patronage of the state merely for the purpose of gratifying their personal predilections, gave us several Kings unfitted by their education and habits to be gracious and affable hosts. They had been born and bred on the Continent. They never felt themselves at home in our island. If they spoke our language, they spoke it inelegantly and with effort. Our national character they never fully understood. Our national manners they hardly attempted to acquire. The most important part of their duty they performed better than any ruler who preceded them: for they governed strictly according to law: but they could not be the first gentlemen of the realm, the heads of polite society. If ever they unbent, it was in a very small circle where hardly an English face was to be seen; and they were never so happy as when they could escape for a summer to their native land. They had indeed their days of reception for our nobility and gentry; but the reception was a mere matter of form, and became at last as solemn a ceremony as a funeral.
