---
title: Populism
author: Hoagy
---

Why do we accept the term populism?

Cambridge Dict:
‘political ideas and activities that are intended to get the support of ordinary peopleby giving them what they want’

From the FT this week:
‘Giuseppe Conte has been given a formal mandate to become Italy’s next prime minister, heading a coalition of two populist parties that is set to take power...’

So what, exactly do we mean? What do we learn, when we find out these parties are populist


Perhaps we can say that these are people calling for radical change, and that


But perhaps it is not about the policies themselves but the fact that they are picked firstly for the fact that they are wanted, and not because there is original belief in them? We thus would have a theoretically objective category based on decision making that treats evidence of efficacy as secondary at best.

Firstly, this is surely at least part of what we want from our representative democracy.
It is hardly new to say we would rather our politicians led the people to informed policy decisions rather than pandering to ‘the masses’ but democracy is sustained by the idea that the decentralised decision making power of the people is a powerful tool. In any case, if this is what ‘the people’ want, presumably they believe it will be effective and if existing parties refuse to offer that option then new parties will arise who do, and will believe it at least a vaguely principled sense. The distinction, therefore, is not in my opinion a valid one: cynical is not a valid proxy for populism.


Elements of scapegoating inherent in it? Yes, there is a strong element of a moralised conflict theory - the bad guys are winning, hence things are bad, but things will be excellent if they are stripped of their power. But again, this is hardly always false. ‘The government is corrupt and the whole stinking system needs to be torn down’ has been true numerous times.

OUTLINE:
Populism seems to mean easy, false answers.
This contains an assumption that it is wrong in th. We use fascist as an insult, but this is a meaningful policy term, made an insult because of its awful consequences. Instead we’ve allowed an insult to
The elite/masses, us/them distinction which is deeply harmful at the moment reaches its peak when

It seems to be a universal signal that the opposition’s position is essentially stupid, all the disdain of foolish easy answers put into a term that pretends to be an objective description of their position.

Cuts to the core of ideas of democracy. Fairly common in ideas about democracy that people expect it to result in a clear class distinction. Rich vs poor or educated vs uneducated, elites vs underclass. Perhaps it is an under appreciated argument for a two party duopoly is that it makes such divisions difficult. Miraculously, this largely does not seem to have happened. US coalitions tend to be drawn as coastal white liberals and minorities vs rural whites and business interests. Ok maybe that last one isn’t exactly a category but its key to the way that both sides can variously be portrayed as being the elite, the one with the power. Populism, on the other hand is a term that applies best when there is a political position that is condemned by the elites of both the left and the right.


Something deeply conservative about the entire term, because there is a close relationship between the level
,

To me it seems clear when we say it we mean when we say an issue is poplulist it clearly isn’t just because its popular. It would be odd, for example, (though perhaps not in some circles) to descibe

Is, for example, Modern Monetary Theory populist? It has numerous academic papers surrounding it, with numbers models.

Other people seem to suggest that it takes a standard neo-Keynesian paradigm, simplifies it (especially regarding inflation dynamics)so that some veritable paraceas should be with reach

What about nationalisation? It seems undeniable that support in the UK

In the case of nationalisation, to use the term to refer to it or its champions would be to betray a right-wing bias, implying that surely the responsible lefties realise that it doesn’t work. This might have been an acceptable picture of the situation under Blair [CHECK] but with Corbyn this moves explicitly into the Overton political and media mainstream, academics in support get more voice and the term becomes inapplicable.

What do I think should happen? Effort to replace populist with less value-aden terms, thereby affording. It is important to call a racist policy a racist policy, and a stupid policy a stupid policy, where the evidence can be provided. There may be a sense that dignifying damaging policy with its own special zone in belief space can be harmful by providing legitimacy. Especially if my intuitions on the class nature of the issue above are correct then I think this is in fact a valuable task to provide mas, but the current situation certainly does not call a spade a spade. For example, a core case of something often viewed as common among the commoners but rejected by cross-party elites are racist stereotypes. This theme, from Trump to Orban is prevalent enough that ‘populism’ without clarification always hints at harnessing these dark elements without making it explicit, both tarnishing and whitewashing with the same brush. Politics in the last few years have thrown up new coalitions, new policy positions and new parties to represent them. New terms need to be found to label these various and powerful forces, ‘populism’ will not do.

